# Data Model数据模型

## Hierarchical Data Model(层次模型)

- Tree

- PCR
  - A data scheme consists of PCRs
  - Every PCR expresses one 1:N relationship
  - Every record type can only have one parent
- Virtual Record

## Network Data Model(网状模型)

- Set

- Record 
- Data Items
- Link record

## Relational Data Model(关系模型)

###  Feature

- Table
- Based on set theory, high abstract level.
- Relational Algebra
- No procedure query language ----SQL
- Soft Link

### Term

- Attribution(属性) and Domain(域)
  - Atomic data --- 1NF
  - Null
- Relation(关系) and Tuple(元组)
  - An entity of real world can be expressed as one or more than one relations.
  - A relation is a N-ary relationship defined on all of its attribute domain.
  - This is called the schema of R, and n is the number of attributes, called the degree of R. Ai(1≤i ≤n) is attribute name.
  - An instance (value) of R can be expressed as r or r(R), it is a set of n-tuple.
  - Relation is also called table. Attribute is also called column, and tuple is also called row.
- Primary Key
  - 极大无关组
- Foreign Key
  - 引用其他表，在被引用表中是主键，这组属性在这张表中是外键
  - Enrolled，不能指空
- Other Integrity Constraints
  - Domain integrity constraint: An attributes' value must be a value in the domain of this attribute.
  - Entity integrity constraint: The value of primary key of each tuple must be unique. Primary key cannot be NULL.



# Relational Algebra(关系代数)

## Basic operations:

- Selection($\sigma$): Selects a subset of rows from relation.
  - Selects rows that satisfy selection condition.
  - No duplicates in result.
  - Schema of result identical to that of input relation.
  - Result relation can be the input for another relational algebra operation!
- Projection($\pi$)投影: Deletes unwanted columns from relation.
  - Schema of result contains exactly the fields in the projection list, with the same names that they had in the input relation.
  - Projection operator has to eliminate duplicates. Note: real systems typically
    don’t do duplicate elimination unless the user explicitly asks for it.
- Cross-product ($\times$)笛卡尔乘积 : Allows us to combine two relations.
  - Result schema has one attribute per attribute of S1 and R1, with attribute names inherited if possible.
- Set-difference ($-$): Tuples in reln.1, but not in reln. 2.
- Union ($\cup$): Tuples in reln. 1 and in reln. 2.
  - **Union, Intersection, Set-Difference**
  - Same number of fields.
  - Corresponding attributes have the same type.

## Additional operations:

- Addtionals:
  - {$\sigma, \pi, \times, -, \cup$} is a complete operation set. Any otherr elational algebra operations can be derived from them.
  - Additional operations: **Intersection, join, division, outer join, outer union**: Not essential, but (very!) useful.
  - Since each operation returns a relation, operations can be composed! (Algebra is “closed”.)

- **Joins**:

  - Condition Join
  - Equi-Join
  - Natural Join: Equi-join on all common attributes.

- **Divisioin**: 

  - Let A have 2 fields, x and y; B have only field y:

    $A/B = \{ x ~|~ \exists \langle x , y\rangle \in A,  \forall \langle y \rangle \in B \}$

  - A/B contains all x tuples (sailors) such that for every y tuple (boat) in B, there is an xy tuple in A.

  - **Expressing A/B Using Basic Operators**：

    - For A/B,  at first, compute all x values that are **not disqualified** by some y value in B.
    - **Disqualified x values:** $\pi_x((\pi_x(A)\times B)-A)$
    - **A/B:** $\pi_x(A)-\pi_x((\pi_x(A)\times B)-A)$

- Outter Joins:

  - In join operation, only matching tuples fulfilling join conditions are left in results. Outer joins will keep unmated tuples, the vacant part is set Null.
  - Left outer join
  - Right outer join
  - Full outer join

- Outer Unions:

  - The extension of union operation. It can union two relations which are not union-compatible.
  - The attribute set in result is the union of attribute sets of two operands.
  - The values of attributes which don’t exist in original tuples are filled as NULL

# Relational Calculus(关系演算)

- Relational Algebra needs to **specify the order of operations**; while relational calculus only needs to **indicate the logic condition the result must be fulfilled**.
- Comes in two flavors: **Tuple relational calculus (TRC)** and **Domain relational calculus (DRC).**
- **Formulas.** An answer tuple is essentially an assignment of constants
  to variables that **make the formula evaluate to true**.

## DRC(域关系演算)

- Query has the form: $\{\langle \rm{x_1,x_2, ... , x_n} \rangle~|~ \rm{P(x_1,x_2,...,x_n,x_{n+1},...,x_{n+m})}\}$

- **Answer** includes all **tuples$\langle \rm{x_1,x_2, ... , x_n} \rangle$** that make the formula $\rm{P(x_1,x_2,...,x_n,x_{n+1},...,x_{n+m})}$ be **true**.

  - There is an important restriction: the variables $\rm{x_1,x_2, ... , x_n}$ that appear to the left of ‘|’ must **be the only free variables** in the formula P(...).

- **Formula** is recursively defined, starting with simple **atomic formulas** (getting tuples from relations or making comparisons of values), and building bigger and better formulas **using the logical connectives.**

  ### DRC Formulas

  - **Atomic formula:**
    - $\langle \rm{x_1,x_2,...,x_n}\rangle \in R$
    - X *op* Y
    - X *op* constant
    - *op* is one of $<,>,=,\leqslant, \geqslant, \neq$
  - **Formula**:
    - an atomic formula, 
    - $\rm \lnot p,p\and q,p\or q$, where p and q are formulas.
    - X(p(X)), where variable X is **free** in p(X)
    - ∀X(p(X)), where variable X is **free** in p(X)
  - **Free and Bound** Variables
    - The use of quantifiers X. $\exists$ X and $\forall$ X is said to bind. 

  ### Unsage Queries, Expressive Power

  - Relational Completeness: $\{\sigma, \pi, \times, -, \cup\}$ is a complete operation set. Relational calculus can express these five operations easily, so relational calculus is also Relational Completeness. SQL language is based on relational calculus, so it can express any query that is expressible in relational algebra /calculus.

## TRC(元组关系演算)

- Query has the form: $\{\mathrm{t}[\langle attribute~list \rangle]~|~\mathrm{P}(\mathrm t)\}$
- t is called tuple variable.
- Answer includes all tuples $\mathrm{t}[\langle attribute~list \rangle]$ that make the formula P(t) be true.



# ER Data Model

- Entity
- Relationship
- **E-R Diagram**

